Tutorial-2 (#94)
Adamage/tutorials: tutorials/pytorch/tut2_efficient_data_loading/README.md

# Efficient data loading with PopTorch

This tutorial will present how PopTorch could help to efficiently load data to 
your model and how to avoid common sources of performance loss from the host. 
This will also cover the more general notion of batching on IPUs that is also 
relevant to other frameworks.

Requirements:

>    - A Poplar SDK environment enabled (see [Installation](https://docs.graphcore.ai/projects/poptorch-user-guide/en/latest/installation.html) of the PopTorch User Guide)

Reviewer: The comment from Harry should have been applied to the next bullet point. This bullet point was correct before

Author: whoops, done

   guide for your IPU system)

>    - The PopTorch Python library installed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - The PopTorch Python library installed (see [Installation](https://docs.graphcore.ai/projects/poptorch-user-guide/en/latest/installation.html) of the PopTorch User Guide)
```

Reviewer 2: Not resolved

   - `pip install torchvision`

##	PyTorch and PopTorch DataLoader

If you are familiar with PyTorch you may have used [torch.utils.data.DataLoader](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/data.html#torch.utils.data.DataLoader).

PopTorch provides [its own DataLoader](https://docs.graphcore.ai/projects/poptorch-user-guide/en/latest/batching.html#poptorch-dataloader) 
which is a wrapper around `torch.utils.data.DataLoader`.  
It accepts the same arguments as PyTorch's DataLoader with some extra features 
specific to the IPU:
- It takes a `poptorch.Options` instance to use IPU-specific features.
- It automatically computes the number of elements consumed by 
[one step](#how-many-samples-will-then-be-loaded-in-one-step).
- It enables asynchronous data loading.
See the [documentation](https://docs.graphcore.ai/projects/poptorch-user-guide/en/latest/batching.html#poptorch-asynchronousdataaccessor)
about asynchronous mode.

> Let’s load the same model as in [the introductory tutorial on PopTorch](../tut1_basics) 

Reviewer 2: You say reload, but it isn't imported from anywhere. 
```suggestion
Let’s reuse the model from [the introductory tutorial on PopTorch](../tut1_basics) 
```

Reviewer 2: Not resolved

and make a random dataset to play with the different IPU parameters.

We will start by importing the necessary libraries:

```python
import time

import poptorch
import torch
import torch.nn as nn
```

Now we will define some global variables that are used later. If you change 

> any of these values then you should re-run all the cells below:

Reviewer 2: References to cells in the README are jarring

PopTorch provides [its own DataLoader](https://docs.graphcore.ai/projects/poptorch-user-guide/en/latest/batching.html#poptorch-dataloader) 
which is a wrapper around `torch.utils.data.DataLoader`.  
It accepts the same arguments as PyTorch's DataLoader with some extra features 
specific to the IPU:
- It takes a `poptorch.Options` instance to use IPU-specific features.
- It automatically computes the number of elements consumed by 
[one step](#how-many-samples-will-then-be-loaded-in-one-step).
- It enables asynchronous data loading.
See the [documentation](https://docs.graphcore.ai/projects/poptorch-user-guide/en/latest/batching.html#poptorch-asynchronousdataaccessor)
about asynchronous mode.

Let's reuse the model from [the introductory tutorial on PopTorch](https://github.com/graphcore/tutorials/tree/sdk-release-2.2/tutorials/pytorch/tut1_basics) 
and make a random dataset to play with the different IPU parameters.

We will start by importing the necessary libraries:

```python
import time

import poptorch
import torch
import torch.nn as nn
from sys import exit
```

> **The following cell is only necessary to prevent errors when running the 

Reviewer: Sorry styling looks weird on this, think you can remove the bold text. With your change to the code it doesn't throw an error in the notebook so there's less need to bring attention to it - it's fine if someone runs the cell

        self.fc2 = nn.Linear(100, 10)
        self.log_softmax = nn.LogSoftmax(dim=0)
        self.loss = nn.NLLLoss()

    def forward(self, x, labels=None):
        x = self.pool(self.relu(self.conv1(x)))
        x = self.norm(self.relu(self.conv2(x)))
        x = torch.flatten(x, start_dim=1)
        x = self.relu(self.fc1(x))
        x = self.log_softmax(self.fc2(x))
        if self.training:
            return x, self.loss(x, labels)
        return x

opts = poptorch.Options()
opts.deviceIterations(device_iterations)
opts.replicationFactor(replicas)

model = ClassificationModel()
training_model = poptorch.trainingModel(
    model,
    opts,
    torch.optim.SGD(model.parameters(), lr=0.001, momentum=0.9)
)
```

Now we will create a sample random dataset, which we will later use to calculate 
processing time. 

```python
features = torch.randn([10000, 1, 128, 128])
labels = torch.empty([10000], dtype=torch.long).random_(10)
dataset = torch.utils.data.TensorDataset(features, labels)
```

> >**Note**: executing the code in python script requires an conditional block:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>**Note**: executing the code in python script requires the conditional block:
```

Reviewer 2: Not resolved

>```python
>if __name__ == '__main__':
>```

> >it is necessary to avoid [issues with asynchronous DataLoader](https://docs.graphcore.ai/projects/poptorch-user-guide/en/latest/batching.html#poptorch-asynchronousdataaccessor)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>This is necessary to avoid [issues with asynchronous DataLoader](https://docs.graphcore.ai/projects/poptorch-user-guide/en/latest/batching.html#poptorch-asynchronousdataaccessor)
```

, additionally the dataset must be serializable by pickle.

We are using larger images (128x128) to simulate a heavier data load.
This will cause the input size of the layer `fc1` to change from  

> `self.fc1 = nn.Linear(972, 100)` to `self.fc1 = nn.Linear(41772, 100)` 

Reviewer 2: When was it 972?

Author: Done

> Let’s set up a PopTorch DataLoader with asynchronous mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let’s set up a PopTorch DataLoader in asynchronous mode.
```

```python
training_data = poptorch.DataLoader(
    opts,
    dataset=dataset,
    batch_size=batch_size,
    shuffle=True,
    drop_last=True,
    num_workers=num_workers,
    mode=poptorch.DataLoaderMode.Async
)
```

> The asynchronous mode of `poptorch.DataLoader` launches the data loading process 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The asynchronous mode of `poptorch.DataLoader` performs the data loading
```

> on a separate process to allow for the data to be preprocessed asynchronously 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
on a separate process. This allows the data to be preprocessed asynchronously 
```

on the CPU to minimize CPU/IPU transfer time. This is why we prefer to use this 

> option when the conditions described in the note above are met.

Reviewer 2: Is this sentence necessary?

## Understanding batching with IPU

When developing a model for the IPU, you will encounter different notions of 

> batching. Mini-batches, replica batches, global batches... This section will 

Reviewer 2: I don't think using elipsis matches the tone of the tutorial.

```suggestion
batching. Mini-batches, replica batches, global batches, etc. This section will 
```

explain how these hyperparameters are related to the IPU and how to compute 

> the number of samples the DataLoader is going to fetch at one step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the number of samples the DataLoader is going to fetch for one step.
```

Every pipeline stage needs to update its weights when the gradients are ready. 
However, it would be very inefficient to update them after each mini-batch 
completion. The solution is the following:
After each backward pass the gradients are accumulated together for ***K*** 
mini-batches. Then, the accumulators are used to update the stage weights. 
This is gradient accumulation. This value can be set in PopTorch via the option:
`opts.Training.gradientAccumulation(K)`
In the previous part, we only had 1 mini-batch per weight update. This time we 
have ***K*** mini-batches per weight update.
Then, for one device iteration with pipeline we have multiplied the number of 
samples processed by ***K***.

More information about gradient accumulation can be found 
[in the PopTorch User Guide](https://docs.graphcore.ai/projects/poptorch-user-guide/en/latest/batching.html#poptorch-options-training-gradientaccumulation).

#### Replication

![Replication](static/replica.png)  
Replication describes the process of running multiple instances of the same 
model simultaneously on different IPUs to achieve data parallelism. A great 

> gain can be obtained from it. If the model requires ***N*** IPUs and the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
gain in throughput can be obtained from it. If the model requires ***N*** IPUs and the 
```

>```python
>if __name__ == '__main__':
>```
>This is necessary to avoid [issues with asynchronous DataLoader](https://docs.graphcore.ai/projects/poptorch-user-guide/en/latest/batching.html#poptorch-asynchronousdataaccessor)
The asynchronous dataloader calls the spawn method, which creates a new python 
interpreter. This interpreter will import the main module of the application. 
Therefore, we need protection against infinite spawning of new processes and 
repeated, undesirable code invocations. Therefore, the entire executable part 
of the script should be in an if block. Function and class definitions do not 
have to be in this block. This change does not apply to interactive python 
Interpreters (e.g. Jupyter notebooks) which support multiprocessing in a 
different way. Additionally the dataset must be serializable by pickle.

In tutorial 1 we used images from the MNIST dataset with a size of 28x28, now
we will use larger images (128x128) to simulate a heavier data load.
This change affects the input size of the layer `fc1` which we change from  
`self.fc1 = nn.Linear(972, 100)` to `self.fc1 = nn.Linear(41772, 100)`. 

> Let’s set up a PopTorch DataLoader in asynchronous mode.

Reviewer: The apostrophe in "Let's" is a different character, so when I run `convert` I get the following output: "Letâs" Please double check the rest of this file for these characters and replace

Author: fixed, I will check that also in tutorials 7/10

For each step, the number of samples contained in `data` and `labels` will be:  
***N = Global batch size x Device iterations***

##	Tuning hyperparameters

### Evaluating the asynchronous DataLoader

How to make sure the DataLoader is not a bottleneck for our model throughput?
In this tutorial we made an example benchmark to answer this question:

> 0) As we will often measure time we will prepare a class to help us work with it:

Reviewer: Start number from 1, doesn't seem to apply correctly in markdown

Author: done

```python
class catchtime:
    def __enter__(self):
        self.seconds = time.time()
        return self

    def __exit__(self, type, value, traceback):
        self.seconds = time.time() - self.seconds
```

1)	Evaluate the asynchronous DataLoader throughput without the IPU.
We just loop through the DataLoader without running the model so we can estimate 
its maximum throughput.

```python
steps = len(training_data)

with catchtime() as t:
    for i, (data, labels) in enumerate(training_data):
        a, b = data, labels

print(f"Total execution time: {t.seconds:.2f} s")
items_per_second = (steps * device_iterations * batch_size * replicas) / t.seconds
print(f"DataLoader throughput: {items_per_second:.2f} items/s")

training_data.terminate()
```

    Total execution time: 0.16 s
    DataLoader throughput: 58346.23 items/s

> Note, that we manually terminated DataLoader object in order to inform the 

Reviewer: This is only required in Jupyter notebooks, correct? If so maybe worth being more explicit. Also, note should be in a similar style to the note earlier about asynchronous data accessor

Author: I took the description from tut 3

            pass
    items_per_second = (steps * device_iterations * batch_size * replicas) / t.seconds

    print(f"DataLoader: {items_per_second:.2f} items/s")

    with catchtime() as t:
        if synthetic_data:
            # With synthetic data enabled, no data is copied from the host to the
            # IPU, so we don't use the dataloader, to prevent influencing the
            # execution time and therefore the IPU throughput calculation
            for _ in range(steps):
                training_model(data_batch, labels_batch)
        else:
            for data, labels in training_data:
                training_model(data, labels)

    items_per_second = (steps * device_iterations * batch_size * replicas) / t.seconds
    print(f"IPU throughput: {items_per_second:.2f} items/s")

    training_data.terminate()
```

Now we are ready to conduct experiments

### Case 1: No bottleneck

- mini-batch size: 16
- replica: 1 (no replication)
- device iterations: 50
- workers: 32
- workers: 8

=> Global batch size:  16
=> Global batch size 16 with synthetic data

DataLoader throughput: 70523 items/s  
Synthetic data throughput: 22170 items/s  
Real data throughput: 17150 items/s

> In that case, if the DataLoader throughput fell below 22170, it could be limiting.

Reviewer: Worth adding this comment back in about the dataloader not being a limiting factor (take out the absolute number though since it will vary a bit between runs)

>     DataLoader: 104683.40 items/s

Reviewer: These numbers don't make sense? 🤔

=> Global batch size 64 with real data

```python
validate_model_performance(dataset, batch_size=16, replicas=4,
                           device_iterations=50, num_workers=8,
                           synthetic_data=False)
```

    DataLoader: 97995.13 items/s

    IPU throughput: 37289.57 items/s

This example gave an idea of how increasing the global batch size can improve 
the throughput.

The runtime script where you can play with the parameters can be found in the 
file: `tuto_data_loading.py`. Helpful arguments:
```bash

> --synthetic-data  # Run with IPU-generated synthetic data

Reviewer: Is this why we don't have a single source code_only output? If we do add the code only output, should we keep this file?

Author: Check https://github.com/Adamage/tutorials/pull/94#issuecomment-940825224

For each step, the number of samples contained in `data` and `labels` will be:  
***N = Global batch size x Device iterations***

##	Tuning hyperparameters

### Evaluating the asynchronous DataLoader

> How to make sure the DataLoader is not a bottleneck for our model throughput?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
How can we make sure the DataLoader is not a bottleneck for our model throughput?
```

In this tutorial we made an example benchmark to answer this question:
1) As we will often measure time we will prepare a class to help us work with it:

```python
class catchtime:
    def __enter__(self):
        self.seconds = time.time()
        return self

    def __exit__(self, type, value, traceback):
        self.seconds = time.time() - self.seconds
```

2)	Evaluate the asynchronous DataLoader throughput without the IPU.
We just loop through the DataLoader without running the model so we can estimate 
its maximum throughput.

```python
steps = len(training_data)
with catchtime() as t:
    for i, (data, labels) in enumerate(training_data):
        a, b = data, labels

print(f"Total execution time: {t.seconds:.2f} s")
items_per_second = (steps * device_iterations * batch_size * replicas) / t.seconds
print(f"DataLoader throughput: {items_per_second:.2f} items/s")

training_data.terminate()
```

    Total execution time: 0.24 s
    DataLoader throughput: 40836.33 items/s

> >***Note for release of resources***:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>***Note about releasing resources***:
```

>We have to detach IPU devices and also execute method `terminate` 
>of the `DataLoader` instance to fully terminate all worker threads.
>The need for terminating the workers manually arises from the fact that we use
>here the Asynchronous Data Loader `DataLoaderMode.Async` and that the data
>sample count is not exactly divisible by the resulting number of multiplied
>batch size and device count, leaving some workers waiting for their turn which

> >might not happen due to training ending first before all samples are exhausted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>might not happen due to training ending before all samples are exhausted.
```

Knowing that, if the asynchronous DataLoader throughput is greater or equal to 
this upper bound, it will not be a bottleneck.  
Else, there is a risk that the DataLoader throughput is limiting. 

Note that this is only true if you're using an asynchronous DataLoader, the 
synchronous one can still slow down the overall execution as it will be run 
serially.

>***Note for IPU benchmarking***:
>The warmup time can be avoided by calling `training_model.compile(data, labels)` 
before any other call to the model. If not, the first call will include the 
compilation time.
>```python
># Warmup
>print("Compiling + Warmup ...")
>training_model.compile(data, labels)
>```

```python
training_model = poptorch.trainingModel(
    model,
    opts,
    poptorch.optim.SGD(model.parameters(), lr=0.001, momentum=0.9)
)
training_data = poptorch.DataLoader(
    opts,
    dataset=dataset,
    batch_size=batch_size,
    shuffle=True,
    drop_last=True,
    num_workers=num_workers,
    mode=poptorch.DataLoaderMode.Async,
    async_options={"early_preload": True}
)
steps = len(training_data)
data_batch, labels_batch = next(iter(training_data))
training_model.compile(data_batch, labels_batch)
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Why are these separate code blocks?

Author: In order to hide output from the compilation of the model

```python
print(f"Evaluating: {steps} steps of {device_iterations * batch_size * replicas} items")

# With synthetic data enabled, no data is copied from the host to the IPU,
# so we don't use the dataloader, to prevent influencing the execution
# time and therefore the IPU throughput calculation
with catchtime() as t:
    for _ in range(steps):
        training_model(data_batch, labels_batch)

items_per_second = (steps * device_iterations * batch_size * replicas) / t.seconds
print(f"Total execution time: {t.seconds:.2f} s")
print(f"IPU throughput: {items_per_second:.2f} items/s")

training_data.terminate()
```

    Evaluating: 12 steps of 800 items
    Total execution time: 0.28 s
    IPU throughput: 33824.89 items/s

### What if the DataLoader throughput is too low?

You can:
- Try using the asynchronous mode of `poptorch.DataLoader`.
- Try to increase the global batch size or the number of device iterations.

> - Adjust the number of workers.

Reviewer 2: Specify how to adjust

```suggestion
- Increase the number of workers.
```

for an iterator to be created: for instance, when you enter the main loop). 
If the DataLoader is created before the model compilation is called, the data 
will be ready to be used when the compilation is over. The main drawback is 
that more RAM will be used on host as the data accessor and the compilation 
will work at the same time.
> The options `miss_sleep_time_in_ms`, `early_preload`, `load_indefinitely` 
and `buffer_size` are specific to the AsynchronousDataAccessor. They will need 
to be passed to the DataLoader via the dictionary `async_options`:

```python
training_data = poptorch.DataLoader(opts, dataset=dataset, batch_size=16, 
                                    shuffle=True, drop_last=True,
                                    num_workers=4, mode=poptorch.DataLoaderMode.Async,
                                    async_options={"early_preload": True, "miss_sleep_time_in_ms": 0})
```

### Device iterations vs global batch size

Even if we made sure the DataLoader is not a bottleneck anymore, the strategy 
we used for batching can be suboptimal. We must keep in mind that increasing 
the global batch size will improve the IPU utilisation while increasing device 

> iteration will not.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
iterations will not.
```

#### Case of a training session

We have seen that the device can efficiently iterate while taking data prepared 
by the CPU in a queue. However, one iteration implies gradient computation and 
weight update on the device. The backward pass is computationally expensive. 
Then, for training it is recommended to prefer bigger global batch size over 
many device iterations in order to maximise parallelism.

#### Case of an inference session 

For inference only, there is no gradient computation and weights are frozen. 
In that case increasing the number of device iterations and using a smaller 
global batch-size should not harm.

#### Conclusion: Training and inference sessions
Finally, as a general recommendation these two parameters have to be tuned so 

> your DataLoader can consume all the dataset in the smallest number of steps 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
your DataLoader can consume the whole dataset in the smallest number of steps 
```

without throttling.  
We can get this number of steps just by getting the length of the DataLoader 
object:
```python
steps = len(training_data)
```

For an IterableDataset, the whole dataset is not necessarily consumed. With the 
`drop_last` argument, elements of the dataset may be discarded. If the batch 
size does not properly divide the number of elements per worker, the last 
uncomplete batches will be discarded.

## Experiments

We invite you to try these different sets of parameters to assess their effect. 
We included the throughput we obtained for illustration but it may vary 
depending on your configuration.  

> *Note: Compilation can take few minutes.*

Reviewer 2: Should this be in a note block?

```suggestion
>*Note: Compilation can take few minutes.*
```

- mini-batch size: 16
- replica: 4
- device iterations: 50
- workers: 4

=> Global batch size 64 with synthetic data

```python
validate_model_performance(dataset, batch_size=16, replicas=4,
                           device_iterations=50, num_workers=4,
                           synthetic_data=True)
```

    DataLoader: 3338472.63 items/s
    IPU throughput: 135660.71 items/s

=> Global batch size 64 with real data

```python
validate_model_performance(dataset, batch_size=16, replicas=4,
                           device_iterations=50, num_workers=4,
                           synthetic_data=False)
```

    DataLoader: 2451316.11 items/s

    IPU throughput: 36072.34 items/s

This example gave an idea of how increasing the global batch size can improve 
the throughput.

The runtime script where you can play with the parameters can be found in the 
file: `tuto_data_loading.py`. Helpful arguments:
```bash
--synthetic-data  # Run with IPU-generated synthetic data
--replicas # Takes an integer parameter to set the number of replicas
```

# Summary
- To efficiently load your dataset to the IPU, the best practice is to use the 
dedicated PopTorch DataLoader.

> - At one step, ***N = Global batch size x Device iterations*** samples will be 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- During one step, ***N = Global batch size x Device iterations*** samples will be 
```

loaded.
- A good way to know if the DataLoader is not a bottleneck is to compare its 
throughput with the model throughput on synthetic data.

> - Asynchronous mode can provide better performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Asynchronous mode can provide better throughput performance.
```

Then, for training it is recommended to prefer bigger global batch size over 
many device iterations in order to maximise parallelism.

#### Case of an inference session 

For inference only, there is no gradient computation and weights are frozen. 
In that case increasing the number of device iterations and using a smaller 
global batch-size should not harm.

#### Conclusion: Training and inference sessions
Finally, as a general recommendation these two parameters have to be tuned so 
your DataLoader can consume the whole dataset in the smallest number of steps 
without throttling.  
We can get this number of steps just by getting the length of the DataLoader 
object:
```python
steps = len(training_data)
```

For an IterableDataset, the whole dataset is not necessarily consumed. With the 
`drop_last` argument, elements of the dataset may be discarded. If the batch 
size does not properly divide the number of elements per worker, the last 
uncomplete batches will be discarded.

## Experiments

We invite you to try these different sets of parameters to assess their effect. 
We included the throughput we obtained for illustration but it may vary 
depending on your configuration.  

> >*Note: Compilation can take few minutes.*

Reviewer: This note about compilation time should either be removed completely or moved up to where compilation actually happens

***Why is the throughput lower with real data?***  
As mentioned previously, using synthetic data does not include the stream 
copies on the IPU. It also excludes the synchronisation time with the host. 

### Case 2: Larger global batch size with replication

Let’s try to get better training performances by increasing the global batch size.
We can choose to increase the replication factor so it avoids loading more data 
at a time on a single IPU.

- mini-batch size: 16
- replica: 4
- device iterations: 50
- workers: 8

=> Global batch size:  64

```python
if __name__ == '__main__':
    print('\nGlobal batch size 64 with synthetic data:')
    validate_model_performance(dataset, batch_size=16, replicas=4,
                               device_iterations=50, num_workers=8,
                               synthetic_data=True)

    print("\nGlobal batch size 64 with real data:")
    validate_model_performance(dataset, batch_size=16, replicas=4,
                               device_iterations=50, num_workers=8,
                               synthetic_data=False)
```

DataLoader throughput: 131633 items/s  
Synthetic data throughput: 136907 items/s  

> Real data throughput: 36088 items/s  

Author: I wonder if the result I got is correct. It is faster than the dataloader on CPU, and previously it was around ~40k items/s not ~130k
